Police in Milan say they have arrested a 39-year-old Italian woman, who has worked for Cardinal Angelo Becciu, a senior Vatican official who was demoted last month over embezzlement claims.
Cecilia Marogna says she was paid €500,000 ($587,000; £454,000) by Cardinal Becciu.
Ms Marogna was arrested after an Interpol warrant was issued at the Holy See's request, according to reports. 
Both Ms Marogna and Cardinal Becciu have denied any wrongdoing.
In interviews with Italian media in recent days, Ms Marogna confirmed that she had been paid €500,000 by Cardinal Becciu through a company she operated in Slovenia. She said she received the money to provide "parallel diplomacy" to help missionaries in conflict areas.
A senior Vatican source told Reuters news agency that Ms Marogna was suspected of "embezzlement and aggravated misappropriation in complicity with others".
The cardinal allegedly authorised the payments to Ms Marogna while serving as number two in the Vatican's Secretariat of State, which manages the Church's donations.
"I didn't steal a single euro," Ms Marogna told newspaper Domani.
She has also denied allegations that she is the cardinal's mistress, telling the newspaper Corriere della Sera that she is a "political analyst and intelligence expert" with "a network of relationships in Africa and the Middle East" to protect the Vatican's representatives abroad.
Cardinal Becciu, 72, unexpectedly resigned last month, revealing he was told to do so by Pope Francis.
He said he was suspected of giving Church money to his brothers. 
The cardinal was involved in a controversial deal to invest in a luxury London building with Church funds, which has since been the subject of a financial investigation.
The cardinal has denied any wrongdoing and has defended the London property deal. 
Resignations at this level of the Vatican are extremely rare.
Cardinal Becciu: Vatican official forced out in rare resignation
Toughest Covid rules extended in south of England
It means more than two-thirds of the nation's population will be in tier three from Saturday.
'Big differences remain' in Brexit talks - EU chief
New six-week NI lockdown to start from 26 December
'Fire patrols at our flats cost us £500,000'
Which places are moving into tier three?
Can I go on furlough and how much will I be paid?
Cancelling Christmas: 'They said they understood'
What does Brexit mean for security in the UK?
'Miracle' Covid survivor feared his life was over
'World's ugliest orchid' tops list of new discoveries
playOur Lives: 'It's not impossible to be happy' VideoOur Lives: 'It's not impossible to be happy'
'Have I got Covid for a second time?'
Will Marianne and Connell find enduring love?
Stream every episode of Normal People on BBC iPlayer now
Daily news briefing direct to your inbox
Sign up for our newsletter
Star Wars' Boba Fett actor Jeremy Bulloch dies aged 751
Brexit trade talks: 'Big differences remain' - Ursula von der Leyen2
Coronavirus: NI facing six-week lockdown from 26 December3
Covid: Toughest rules extended in south of England4
Lockdown rules: What Covid tier is your area in and what are the restrictions?5
Tory MP Tobias Ellwood broke Covid rules, says home secretary6
Jacob Rees-Mogg accuses Unicef of 'playing politics' over UK food campaign7
Covid-19 in the UK: How many coronavirus cases are there in your area?8
Staggered return for England's secondary schools next term9
Coronavirus: Swedish King Carl XVI Gustaf says coronavirus approach 'has failed'10
listenObama's revealing presidential memoirs. AudioObama's revealing presidential memoirs
listenDare you enter The Midnight Library? AudioDare you enter The Midnight Library?
listenFamily always comes first, doesn't it? AudioFamily always comes first, doesn't it?
More brilliant audiobooks from 2020
© 2020 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
