The largest unexploded World War Two bomb ever found in Poland has detonated during the defusing process, a Polish Navy spokesman said.
The chance the bomb - at the bottom of a Baltic Sea shipping canal - would detonate had been put at 50-50 and all the divers were unharmed.
About 750 residents had been evacuated near the port city of Swinoujscie.
The RAF dropped the Tallboy or "earthquake" bomb in a raid in 1945 which sank the German cruiser Lützow.
Swinoujscie was part of Germany and called Swinemünde at the time of the bombardment. 
The shock of the latest detonation was reportedly felt in parts of the city and a video shows the blast throwing up a large column of water into the air.
The bomb was 6m (19ft) long and weighed 5.4 tonnes, nearly half of which was its explosives.
The bomb was embedded at a depth of 12m and only its nose was sticking out.
Naval forces used a remote-controlled device to try to "deflagrate" the bomb - a technique that if successful burns the explosive charge without causing a detonation, the BBC's Adam Easton reports from Warsaw.
"The deflagration process turned into detonation. The object can be considered neutralised, it will not pose any more threat to the Szczecin-Swinoujscie shipping channel," said Lt Cmdr Grzegorz Lewandowski, spokesman for the Polish Navy's 8th Coastal Defence Flotilla.
"All divers were outside the danger zone."
Read more about unexploded WW2 bombs:
Poland still counts losses from WW2 invasion
Toughest Covid rules extended in south of England
It means more than two-thirds of the nation's population will be in tier three from Saturday.
'Big differences remain' in Brexit talks - EU chief
New six-week NI lockdown to start from 26 December
'Fire patrols at our flats cost us £500,000'
Which places are moving into tier three?
Can I go on furlough and how much will I be paid?
Cancelling Christmas: 'They said they understood'
What does Brexit mean for security in the UK?
'Miracle' Covid survivor feared his life was over
'World's ugliest orchid' tops list of new discoveries
playOur Lives: 'It's not impossible to be happy' VideoOur Lives: 'It's not impossible to be happy'
'Have I got Covid for a second time?'
Will Marianne and Connell find enduring love?
Stream every episode of Normal People on BBC iPlayer now
Daily news briefing direct to your inbox
Sign up for our newsletter
Star Wars' Boba Fett actor Jeremy Bulloch dies aged 751
Brexit trade talks: 'Big differences remain' - Ursula von der Leyen2
Coronavirus: NI facing six-week lockdown from 26 December3
Covid: Toughest rules extended in south of England4
Lockdown rules: What Covid tier is your area in and what are the restrictions?5
Tory MP Tobias Ellwood broke Covid rules, says home secretary6
Jacob Rees-Mogg accuses Unicef of 'playing politics' over UK food campaign7
Covid-19 in the UK: How many coronavirus cases are there in your area?8
Staggered return for England's secondary schools next term9
Coronavirus: Swedish King Carl XVI Gustaf says coronavirus approach 'has failed'10
listenObama's revealing presidential memoirs. AudioObama's revealing presidential memoirs
listenDare you enter The Midnight Library? AudioDare you enter The Midnight Library?
listenFamily always comes first, doesn't it? AudioFamily always comes first, doesn't it?
More brilliant audiobooks from 2020
© 2020 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
